There are partisan actors. There are
craven politicians in our country
who don't want people to show up.
>> I'm David Marchese, and today I'm
interviewing Senator Raphael Warnock.
Senator Warnock, a Democrat who
represents the key swing [music] state
of Georgia, said that the Supreme
Court's decision in April to narrow the
Voting Rights Act [music] has poured
fuel on the redistricting arms race.
>> It would be irresponsible in this moment
[music]
for Democrats to unilaterally disarm. We
cannot.
>> He's also a reverend and says there's a
lot the right doesn't understand about
Christian values. [music]
>> I have to ask whether the religion
is more performative than substantive.
>> [snorts]
>> Warnock has a new [music] book called
The Crooked Places Made Straight,
Reflections on the Moral Meaning of
America.
But the book at the forefront of his
mind is perhaps, unsurprisingly, the
Bible.
>> The acid test
of one's faith is the depth of your
commitment to the people who are on the
margins.
>> [music]
>> Here's my conversation with Senator
Raphael Warnock.
Senator Warnock, thank you for taking
the time to be here with us today.
>> Great to be with you.
>> It's an interesting time to be talking
to you. You have called the Supreme
Court's recent ruling on voting rights
Jim Crow in New Clothes.
And you know, we're in a a moment where
voting rights
it's a very fraught issue, more fraught
in a way than it's been in decades, I
would say.
And
I I I want to know a little bit more
about sort of your personal relationship
with voting rights, because your parents
and grandparents grew up in the in the
Jim Crow South. So, can you can you tell
us a bit about what voting rights means
to you from a family perspective?
>> Yes, um you know, I talk a lot about
voting rights uh because
you know, for me voting rights is not
just one issue alongside all of the
other issues we fight up
and struggle and debate about in our
democracy is the very house
in which we live. It's the framework in
which we get to fight for the things
that matter.
And so, I'm a child of the South.
My my mother grew up in Waycross,
Georgia literally picking somebody
else's cotton in the 1950s.
And because of the arc of progress in
this country
uh over the last 60 years
uh I often say the hands that used to
pick somebody else's cotton got to pick
her son to be a United States Senator.
And so, this this story of of fighting
for voting rights doesn't feel distant
to me.
We we've only been a democracy in a real
sense since 1965.
And what it it seems to me we are
witnessing in real time
is an assault
on those basic voting rights.
Uh and it's been stepped up over the
last few years. But let me
>> Let me be really clear.
>> Sure.
>> I I don't separate this right now
black voters
are at the center of the debate that
we're hearing.
But I I think that the Supreme Court has
has committed violence
against our whole
the ways in which ordinary people can
have a voice in our system.
It the same the same Supreme Court that
has gutted section two
of the Voting Rights Act
gutted section five in 2013
is also the same Supreme Court
responsible for Citizens United. And so,
whether we're talking about black voters
or white working class voters, ordinary
people, the voices of the people are
being squeezed out of their democracy.
And as someone who whose parents
uh
lived through that that ugly history, I
take deep offense and I'm very concerned
about our our country.
>> I think there are those who
would
point to your
being able to be elected as senator and
and you know, this is sort of
underpinning the logic of some of the
Supreme Court's decisions lately, but
the fact that you you are a senator is a
kind of evidence that you know, the
Voting Rights Act as conceived is no
longer
as necessary or as important as it was.
So, what's your response to that kind of
logic?
>> Well, the folks who say that don't know
how I got here. Even in my last runoff,
state officials in Georgia
looked at the anatomy of my victory.
In the runoff, which by the way is
itself a vestige of the Jim Crow South,
they cut the the runoff in half and as
we in terms of the number of weeks and
then as we were going into the runoff
that weekend,
state officials in Georgia said, "Sorry,
you can't vote first weekend of the
runoff." And they were referencing an
old law in Georgia that said you can't
vote first weekend if it's a few days
after a holiday. And so they said their
hands were tied.
So, I decided to untie their hands and
sue them.
So, it took a court decision and two
appeals
so that students who are home that
weekend, so that young people, so that
working class, poor people who are
disproportionately black and brown could
turn out and vote. About 70,000 people
voted. I won
by 100,000 votes. This is how voter
suppression works. It's the ways in
which you begin to chip away
at people's access, which again
disproportionately impacts black people,
brown people, poor people. That's how
you swing an election.
Roberts
put forward this theory
that we don't we no longer need the
protections of the Voting Rights Act.
That's what he said in 2013.
But what has happened in the years since
that awful decision in 2013, Shelby
versus Holder? Yes, I'm sitting here,
but the fact is
the gap
in voter turnout, the racial turnout
gap,
has actually
grown wider
since 2013 and
has grown twice as fast
in the states that used to
have to pre-clear, that were under
Section 5, Southern states primarily.
Uh
it's grown twice as fast in those states
now that we have lost the protections
of Section 5. Roberts has long felt that
we didn't need voting rights at the
Voting Rights Act.
He he despises the the Voting Rights
Act.
>> you think that's the case? Why do you
think he feels that way?
>> have to ask him, but he has felt this
way
since he was a young lawyer
in the Reagan Justice Department. It was
the Congress in the 1980s,
the US Congress that overwhelmingly
said,
"Look,
the impact
matters."
And a young Roberts said, "No, it
shouldn't be impact. You should have to
show intent." He was saying that as a
young lawyer in the 1980s, just
15 years or so after the Voting Rights
Law was passed. He's never believed in
it
uh in my in my view, and and he's
carrying it out decades later.
>> But I want to ask a little bit more
about the Kelly decision in particular.
So,
a lot of the discussion in the wake of
the Kelly decision
has has been about its partisan
implications.
You know, it's like the
you know, the it's provided an
opportunity essentially for Republicans
to carve out
uh, seats for themselves that they
didn't have before. And
in that discussion it's conflating race
and partisanship. Sort of like
collapsing two things into one.
And
what does focusing on on the
intertwining of race and partisanship
get right in terms of understanding the
Kelly decision and and what does it get
wrong?
>> Look, the idea that you can just
completely separate these things
I think is on its head false.
Basically, the decision said you can
engage in partisan gerrymander.
>> Right.
>> As long as it's not racial, it's just
partisan.
It's dishonest. The decision is
dishonest.
Um,
when [clears throat]
uh, LBJ passed the Voting Rights Bill
into law,
he said, I think I just gave the South
to the Republicans
for a long time.
And those words were were prophetic as a
result of that decision,
the old Dixiecrats in the old Democratic
Party
left the Democratic Party.
And where did they go? They went to the
Republican Party. So, the irony of this
moment
is that the same uh, partisans who were
attacking voting rights in the 1960s
are now attacking yet again.
>> You just brought up LBJ saying, you
know, passing this is going to lose the
the South for the Democrats and it ended
up, like you said, to be to be true.
That was a
you know, I I guess you could call it
like an unintended negative consequence
of the Voting Rights Act. Can you
foresee any unintended negative
consequences for the Republican Party in
the wake of the the recent Supreme Court
decisions about voting rights?
>> Yeah, I think that
they may get some outcomes that they
they don't expect. Yeah, there there
could be some surprises that come. I do
see opportunities. And I think I think
that they have unleashed something
potentially
uh that they that they did not
anticipate. Uh and that is the deep
offense
that people will feel not just black
voters, certainly black voters,
but but people of moral courage, people
who just have a sense that everybody's
voice needs to be heard. I think that
there that we we may witness a kind of
turnout that could completely change the
math
of gerrymandering. I think we're seeing
historic voter turnout in the early
voting in Georgia right now.
>> Given that
sort of this this gerrymandering battle,
this like I I do think race to the
bottom is what it is in terms of in
terms of of fair representation for
people like that is that is a fact that
that's happening. Do Democrats have any
choice other than to
participate in that race to the bottom
right now?
>> If I had my druthers, we'd get rid of
gerrymandering.
And I've got bills to do so. So,
Republicans can join me anytime. I have
a bill right now.
If they join me in that effort, we could
get rid of gerrymandering, right? But in
the meantime,
it was Donald Trump
who called into the state of Texas
and literally said, "Give me more
seats."
Again, politicians thinking about
themselves rather than the people.
And the Supreme Court poured fuel on
that fire. It would be irresponsible in
this moment
for Democrats to unilaterally disarm. We
cannot. In fact, I think blue state
governors, given the reality that we're
in,
have a have a moral obligation
uh to look and see
where, you know, we can increase our
opportunities to win.
>> In you would probably know these numbers
better than I do, but I think in in a
when President Biden was elected in 2020
the voter turnout was huge and and the
percentage of people who voted eligible
voters who voted was probably mid-60s, I
would guess. So, there is there is like
you're suggesting
>> America yeah, that and that's the irony
of this moment that even when we have
so-called historic turnout in America is
nowhere near what it ought to be.
>> Well, that that's that's my question.
Aside from
outrage or moral outrage about
a given political event,
what do you think is the key
to
getting that getting those huge numbers
of people who are either disengaged or
alienated from the political process to
show up and vote?
>> Well, first of all, let's be clear that
that there are partisan actors, there
are craven politicians in our country
who don't want people to show up. They
really don't want um this diverse,
multi-racial, multi-generational
coalition that I that that sent me to
the Senate
showing up. And part of the reason why I
know that they're craven politicians
again who don't want them to show up is
we haven't even put the infrastructure
in place
to receive them. I mean, look, do you
remember that there was that big debate
um about SB202 and folks were talking
about the fact that you couldn't bring
water.
>> Yeah. Could you explain what SB202 is
>> Oh, I'm sorry. Yeah,
yeah, this this is the voting law in my
view is voter suppression law passed in
Georgia right after I won and Jon Ossoff
won.
Uh it did things like said, you know,
people couldn't bring water to folks in
line you know, while they were standing
in line, couldn't bring refreshments and
there was a lot of outrage about that.
I actually think we were asking the
wrong question.
The question we ought to be asking is
why are people in line so long that they
want lunch?
>> [laughter]
>> I don't want refreshments when I go to
vote. I want to be able to vote. Now, we
all we're all entitled to our own
opinions, not our own facts. The data
shows that black and brown voters
have to stand in line a lot longer
than their white counterparts. The
experience around voting in some
neighborhoods doesn't look the same way
it does in others.
If you're working-class person,
uh and you got to take off from work to
vote,
that is a kind of poll tax in my view.
We we should have weekend voting. We
shouldn't be fighting it. We should be
able to
uh people should have mail-in voting. We
shouldn't be fighting it. We should We
should be making it easy to vote.
>> But do do you have any sense of
you know, when we talk about the legions
of people who are not voting, uh do do
you have a sense of sort of how that
breaks down between
people who
uh
find that there are obstacles
to their ability to go vote as opposed
to people who are disengaged? Like is is
one a bigger problem than the other?
>> There's no question that disengagement
is a real issue in our country. I mean,
I I think that um
we've made our politics
too much about the politicians.
I mean, if you if you listen to the way
we talk about politics in America
in the public square
and with res- with respect in the media,
too often it's about the politicians.
>> It's like sports and talking about the
quarterback. Yeah.
>> it like it's like it's sports. Which
politician is up, who's down, who's in,
who's out. And I think working-day
people, ordinary people, are saying to
themselves, who cares?
And so, this is why I got involved in
something as messy as politics.
I mean, it was a you know, there's a
degree of peril for a pastor to get
involved in this. It's messy.
But I have a faith
that uh
you know, requires me to be engaged. You
know, when I think about my own journey,
you know, I grew up in public housing,
first college graduate in my family,
and here I sit
with four degrees including a PhD,
pastor of Ebenezer Baptist Church, a US
Senator. Who gets to do these things,
right?
What keeps me up at night
is that it would be harder for me to do
those things now than it was for that
kid growing up in the 1980s.
>> Because of attacks on
>> Be- because of growing inequality,
because of attacks on things like the
Pell Grant,
because of our refusal to invest in the
next generation, because of our
obsession with with the culture wars,
rather than focusing on
American competitiveness. And now And
now we're dealing with AI and all of
these things. There are the whole range
of issues we really need to be focused
on, but right now we've got demagogues
who are distracting us with the politics
of division, and I think people are
turned off.
>> I want to switch gears just for a
second. I was uh
just because I saw it kept showing up on
the uh best-seller lists, uh
your colleague in the Senate uh John
Kennedy's book, How to Test Negative for
Stupid, has been a big best-seller. He's
a Republican Senator from from
Louisiana. And so I was I was reading
it. And towards the end, he does kind of
just like a
uh rapid-fire assessment of various
hot-button issues in America. And he
when he writes about race,
and [snorts] he says that America's not
a racist country, and the country's
history is proof
that it's not a racist country. I think
it's pretty easy to imagine someone else
saying, "Actually, the country's history
is proof that racism is pretty deeply
embedded."
Uh
but I don't think Senator Kennedy's view
is wildly out of line with the view of
a lot of conservatives and how they see
race in the country.
And it made me
wonder about in for you, like, where do
you find
common ground there when there's such a
fundamental disagreement about
the country's history when it comes to
race?
>> He is oversimplifying a complicated
issue.
I've always said that America has a
complicated story.
All families, I know this as a pastor,
all families have a complicated story.
And I embody the complexity of the
American story in my own story.
Um I had an older father,
you know, World War II era veteran.
And as a kid,
I remember him telling me the story
about how when he came home,
uh he had to give up his bus seat
to a teenager
while wearing his soldier's uniform.
And that wasn't that long before I was
born, but he had to give up his seat.
But now,
his son sits in a Senate seat.
I love this country, flaws and all.
But part of how you love somebody is you
tell them the truth.
And um
I'd be irresponsible to sit in this seat
while ignoring the fact the land of the
free is the mass incarceration capital
of the world.
I got a brother who went through that
system. He made a terrible mistake. What
he did cannot be justified.
But he was a first-time offender,
nonviolent drug-related offense.
Went to prison, was sentenced to life
without parole. Nobody died.
Nobody got
uh
no one was was hurt violently, you know,
physically.
Nobody even got high.
Long story.
And yet I sit here.
That's the complexity of the story that
perhaps I know in a way that's different
from my colleague and friend John
Kennedy.
>> In your new book,
you
write about how,
you know, Christians in
the United States have
in the past stood on the wrong side of
justice, you know, slavery being the the
prime example.
And you also write about how, if for
example, uh you know, how Speaker Mike
Johnson spent a lot of time praying in
the Capitol's chapel
uh in advance of the passing of the One
Big Beautiful Bill, which is a bill that
you describe as Robin Hood in reverse.
You're just robbing the poor to to give
to the wealthy.
And you know,
I I was reading those things sort of in
in in the same context of,
you know,
people of faith and people of sincere
faith, which I I believe Speaker Johnson
is,
taking political actions that,
you know, you see as ungodly or or
immoral. And
it's was interesting to me that
I didn't really
feel like in the book you you directly
grappled with the question of how you
understand when
fellow believers
take positions that that you can't
morally abide. So, from like a
theological perspective, how do Do
understand that?
>> For me the the acid test
of one's faith is the depth of your
commitment to the people who are on the
margins.
And um
I'm a Matthew 25 Christian.
>> What you do unto the least of us you do
unto me.
>> You do unto me.
>> Yep.
>> And so I don't understand how you read
that,
say a long prayer,
you know, you know, hold hands with your
fellow legislators,
and then cut a trillion dollars, one
trillion dollars,
out of Medicaid
calling it waste, fraud, and abuse. What
are you saying about those people? And
so in light of that,
for me,
um I have to ask whether the religion
>> [snorts]
>> is more performative than substantive.
You know,
like to use these fancy words, but you
know, we we we I'm a I'm a trained
systematic theology theologian. There's
something called the hermeneutics of
suspicion.
>> Tell people what that is.
>> Well, it's when you when you when you
look at a text or you look at the world
and you and you with a critical view,
where you ask the hard questions. So I
want you to know that I apply that same
hermeneutics of suspicion to my own
faith. I examine myself and I ask and I
and I invite other people to ask, what's
really driving this? Why are you taking
that view? Why did you vote this way
actually on that? What's really driving
it? I know you say that you're you're
focused on on this issue and I've seen
it with my with my colleagues, you know,
usually if you ask politicians enough
questions about why they're voting what
they're voting, it's somewhere is
connected to their politics. And so the
question I always ask myself, you know,
am I so committed to self-preservation
that I can't be effective?
And so
I think that the speaker has a certain
agenda
and a certain view.
And it is what that you know, I think I
think that that's that that that
obviously plays a huge role. And there's
a there's a long history of that.
I mean, you know, the
there were many [clears throat]
Christians on the wrong side of slavery.
They were on the wrong side of Jim Crow
segregation.
And so part of
the obligation, I think, of a person of
faith
is to ask yourself, what are you
actually worshipping?
What are you actually committed to?
Are you committed to the poor? Are you
committed to the despised and the
rejected?
Would Jesus agree with the actions of
ICE
in this moment
in which we're seeing organized cruelty
on our streets, masked men jumping out
of unmarked cars, separating families,
uh terrorizing whole communities of
people whether they're
uh documented or not, whether they're
citizens or not. What is it in the
gospel,
I would ask my colleagues, what is it in
the gospel
that says that this is this is right?
Do unto others as you would have them do
unto you.
There's some variation of that in all of
the great faith traditions, in Judaism,
in Christianity, and Islam,
and the Baha'i faith, all the great
traditions.
And um
you know, that that's the question I
think that people aren't asking
themselves deeply enough because if you
do, you might act actually have to make
some decisions that make you a little
bit uncomfortable.
>> What's a decision you've made that's
made you uncomfortable?
>> I don't know. That's that's an
interesting question. I I mean, look,
as someone who votes all the time in the
Senate
um
you know, there are always these
different interests and people
speaking into your ear
about what needs to be done.
And on the one hand
there is the desire
uh to fight, to work for the people that
sent you there.
There's also
the recognition
that if you can't stay in that seat
you can't do those things.
So, if we're honest, all of us who are
in elected office live in that tension.
You know, and I'm in a purple state.
The same state that sent me to the
Senate
voted for Donald Trump.
So, those are the That's Those are the
politics that I navigate every single
day. What helps me in that regard
is that while I do love this job
and it's a dream job because when I get
a victory, the scale
of the victory
is something that be hard to do almost
anywhere else. So, I do feel a moral
obligation to try to stay in this seat
to do the work.
But, what does help me in that regard
and I I hope puts me above being just
another
uh transactional politician
is that I don't need this job.
I really don't. I mean, in terms of my
own sense of personal fulfillment and my
own sense of somebody-ness, if you will.
I don't need this job.
>> Because you have Ebenezer.
>> Well, because I have a project.
And that project is change, that project
is human fulfillment, that project is
justice, and I don't need any particular
job to do that.
>> You know Mark 12:17, right?
>> You tell me.
>> I love this. You Tell tell the Tell the
Christian preacher the
>> [laughter]
>> the the the scripture Believe it or not,
I don't memorize I haven't memorized the
whole Bible.
>> It's a It's a It's [laughter] a famous
line. It's Render to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and to God the things
that are God's.
>> Yes.
>> How do you understand that line?
>> Uh pay your taxes.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh show up as a good a good citizen.
Uh but don't bow down to Caesar. That's
what it means to me.
>> Yeah.
>> Like
you know
>> I didn't mean to test you on that one.
>> Yeah. [laughter] Yeah. Yeah.
>> But it is a [snorts] it is a
a
a piece of of scripture that's about
church and state. And I I really want to
understand
for for you
a man who is driven by his faith, who
who is a is a pastor
>> What I'm
>> How do you under How How How Where are
the lines that that you draw if you draw
them?
And this isn't a leading question. This
is a question from from Comes out of
sincere curiosity. But this is
How do you
delineate between sort of
when you're
driven by
faith and when you're driven by
sort of the the the the the public good?
Cuz it it can't it I don't know that it
can be a perfect overlap of those two
circles.
Maybe maybe it can.
You're in a better position to to tell
me.
>> I'm driven by the values in my faith.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's the values and not the creeds
that I try to take in a responsible way
to my work.
But those values, in my view, are
resonant in all of the great faith
traditions.
and in and in people who claim no faith
tradition at all
but are people of moral courage
love
truth-telling
>> [snorts]
>> justice-making
compassion
empathy
looking into the eyes of your neighbor
and seeing a glimpse of your own
humanity
that that's what drives
my work and and not and not the creeds
of the faith
and you didn't ask me but you know I'll
I'll venture out a little bit into the
wars and so and say that this is what
drives my view for example
on the whole issue around reproductive
choice
I get a lot of attacks from folks on the
right who try to challenge
my pastoral identity
my Christian identity I'm I'm I'm
unbothered by that on the LGBTQ
you know question
you know on on you know for for me we we
live in a diverse democratic republic
and on the issue around choice
you know um I have a deep deep reverence
for life
and I have a profound respect for choice
the question here is whose decision is
it
and
uh I think that that a a woman ought to
have autonomy the ability to decide
>> I was about to call you reverend instead
of senator
>> I I I I answer
to both
reverend the the the the
what what you just described the
how you get attacked on the right uh
uh
from people who are against your uh
positions on uh on women's choice or or
LGBTQ
I have to believe that certainly many of
the people who are attacking you are
authentic in in their belief that your
positions are
ungodly. Now, I apologize if this is if
this is like a
religion 101 question, but how do you
know you're right? Why why do you
how do you have confidence that your
position is the moral one?
>> Oh, if you absolutely know.
And
look, there's things that I clearly
believe deeply.
But faith isn't about knowing.
Faith is just that.
It's an act of faith. [clears throat]
That that is part of my core identity. I
don't even respond to people who say
that cuz they clearly didn't grow up in
my church. They don't know
>> People who say what?
>> question my Christian
sincerity, authenticity. Like I don't
even have time for that. It's so basic
to who I am. I often joke that that you
know, I grew up in a Pentecostal
holiness tradition.
My my folks that seemed speak to spoke
to us in King James English.
Thou shalt wash the dishes lest thou
smite thee with my rod and my staff.
When I when my dad dropped me off to
college, I was looking for him to give
me a few dollars and you know, I'm one
of 12 children in my family, first
college graduate. He was generous.
But you know, he had
didn't have any money. He literally
looked me in the eye
as I was you know, looking for a few
dollars to get through my first
semester, you know, I needed to buy
books.
My dad looked at me in the eye and in
King James English,
he said, "Silver and gold
hath I none.
>> [laughter]
>> But such as I have give I unto thee. The
Lord Jesus Christ go with you, son."
That's the household I grew up in. So, I
don't I don't I don't have time with
people you know, for people who want to
question my my my faith identity.
I I believe
in um
you know, I I'm I'm part of the Kingian
tradition.
And that movement changed America.
And at its height
Martin Luther King Jr. and Rabbi Abraham
Joshua Heschel
marched together.
Rabbi Heschel said, "When I marched
alongside Dr. King,
I felt like my legs were praying."
So, where where is there room
for him
and the Hindu
and the Sikh
and people again who who are agnostic?
Folks who are atheists
>> or searching.
And maybe in part because
the expression of the God that they're
hearing
that is a racist, classist,
misogynistic, homophobic God,
they don't believe in that God, so they
call themselves atheists. Well, the
Christian pastors got a message for
them. I don't believe in that God,
either.
>> [laughter]
>> You know, there's a a lot of discussion
on [snorts] the right about Christianity
being under attack in this country. Um
>> [clears throat]
>> Vice President Vance, for example, talks
about a war being waged on Christians in
the United States.
Do do you understand where that
perception comes from?
>> Yeah, well, who's waging the war?
>> Well, he would say another thing he said
is that the left has labored to push
Christianity out of national life.
>> think
I think
that war on Christianity, my view of the
faith
>> Mhm.
>> is cutting a trillion dollars out of
Medicaid.
Because Jesus spent much of his
ministry, read the Gospels, healing the
sick,
even those with pre-existing conditions.
That's what leprosy was. He never billed
them for his services. They're taking
health care away. That's what a war on
Christianity looks like to me.
I often say that I'm not a senator
who used to be a pastor.
I'm a pastor in the Senate.
But this pastor who serves in the Senate
does not
want to live in anybody's theocracy.
Christian, Jewish,
Muslim.
I don't want to live in anybody's
theocracy.
And um
what they are asserting is a kind of
dangerous
Christian nationalism.
You know
I I'm struck by by J.D. Vance
you know, saying he's defending the
faith on the one hand, but he seems
more than willing to attack the Pope
when the Pope doesn't agree with his
politics
or when the Pope is just calling us to
think about peace.
I mean, did you hear him? He He
literally said
uh you know, the Pope needs to be
careful when he's talking about
theology.
J.D. Vance
who is the newly converted
Catholic
uh newly converted uh Catholic
uh and writes a whole book talking about
his conversion, which
in and of itself is interesting to me.
Um
uh
you know, seeming more than than willing
to attack the Pope and say that he needs
to be careful about talking about
theology. He's already instructing the
Pope
on how to be a good Pope.
And so I I think you see the um
the callousness. I think you see the
hubris.
The willingness
to attack the church and the Pope
himself if it gets in the way with his
in the way of his political agenda.
I'm not impressed.
>> [music]
>> On the interview, we talked to our guest
twice. So, I called Senator Warnock and
we spoke about the Antichrist.
Senator, thank you for taking the time
to speak with me again. I appreciate it.
>> Great to be with you.
>> There's something I want to ask you
about that I find just I
find bonkers in the public discourse
right now and I think you might you
might be well positioned to to offer a
perspective on it. So, I was reading
about
James Talorico in Texas and apparently
some of his opponents refer to him as an
Antichrist. [clears throat]
And also Tucker Carlson has talked about
whether Trump is the Antichrist. Peter
Thiel in in private talks apparently is
often talking about the Antichrist or is
saying perhaps Greta Thunberg is is the
Antichrist. I cannot recall a time in my
living memory when the subject of the
Antichrist was in political or public
discourse. Does it make any sense to
you?
>> No.
No, I mean I I I think
I think that that um
that we're in a moment where folks are
weaponizing whatever they can grab and
religion
is not unusual that religion becomes a
part of that. So, I what I I try
I I don't use my my faith
uh as a cudgel.
I don't I don't use it as a weapon. I
use it as a bridge. And and this this
this this fight about the Antichrist as
you're describing it, if you think about
it, get beneath the religious language,
what it really is is a way of saying
who's inside and who's outside.
Who belongs and who doesn't. Who's on
the side of good, who's on the side of
evil.
And what I'm trying to do is remind us
of of who we are as an American people.
>> You know, you and I spoke maybe a week
and a half ago, something like that. And
when we were talking, I had asked you
about
if you'd made any decisions that you
were uncomfortable with.
And you said that everyone in elected
office lives in the tension between
wanting to do the right thing
and the realization that you need to
stay in the seat that you're that you
hold so that you can continue to try to
do the right thing.
But you didn't actually give me an
example of a decision you'd made that
was difficult in that way. So can you
share a specific political decision or a
political vote you you made where you
felt that tension most strongly?
>> You know, I one of the things that I
wish I had pushed harder for
is voting rights. There was a a moment
where
um
the there was an effort to
raise the debt ceiling. I was literally
a freshman, I'd just gotten here.
We were 50/50 Senate.
And
um
I warned [clears throat] my colleagues
that I felt very strongly that we needed
to do everything
to put out the fire
that was raging against our democracy in
the wake of January 6th. This was months
after that.
State legislatures all across the
country
including my own state had released
dozens of voter suppression bills.
And I was worried that we might get to a
place in our democracy where we would
have crossed the Rubicon
and it would be very very difficult to
get back. And so that was a tough
decision for me. I I I literally thought
about thought seriously [clears throat]
about withholding
my vote
on the debt ceiling deal. But the
concern was that
you know, you're talking about the
American economy
and that the people that I worry about
the most, the most vulnerable members of
of my state
Uh, know,
poor people, middle class people, that
it would hit them the hardest.
Um, and so I I still do wonder about
that decision. I
as I'm watching what's happening,
I wonder if I made the right decision,
that maybe I should have pushed harder.
>> And so you're saying you you could have
withheld your vote in order to
gain
>> My my that to to argue that that if you
wanted if you wanted my vote on this,
>> Uh-huh.
>> we needed to find a path
to get voting rights passed. All the
Democrats were on it.
But we had two Democrats who are no
longer in office
who were not willing to make any
adjustment to the filibuster. We weren't
even trying to get rid of the
filibuster, just making an adjustment
uh, so that we could get this done. And
the process we were working
>> Manchin.
>> There Manchin and Sinema. And I I
thought seriously, uh,
and and
and prayed some long nights about
whether I should should, uh, put my foot
down completely on that issue. I talked
to folks that I respected a great deal.
At the end of the day, I was worried
about the economic pain that it would
create uh, for folks. And so I went with
the caucus. But as I'm watching what's
unfolding right now, I don't know if
that was the right decision or not. I do
know that we should have pushed harder
to get voting rights done.
>> And and let me stick with voting rights
for a second. So you're you're against
gerrymandering. But also when we were
talking earlier, you said that you do
feel that Democrats have a moral
obligation to compete with Republicans
as far as redistricting goes. So so what
But what is the way out of this
sort of doom spiral of of competitive
gerrymandering? Like can can you
describe a world in which these this
problem has been solved and and
districting is fair? Like
how do we get there? What does that look
like?
>> I I that the democracy would be better
off
if we had more competitive congressional
districts in our country. And so, each
side would lose a something lose a
little something. We'd have to give a
little, get a little. Uh but I actually
think that at the end of the day the
country would be better off and I have a
bill
that would do just that. We could ban
partisan gerrymandering uh right away if
the Congress decided to do so. I've got
my bill so far
I've got no Republican takers.
Uh but I'm a preacher the doors of the
church are open and I'd I'd love to see
us find a bipartisan path uh towards a
democracy where the voters are speaking
and rather than politicians picking
their voters, the voters are picking the
people that they want to represent them.
>> But districts would be drawn by
independent committees or something. Is
that what you're going to suggest?
>> independent bipartisan committees.
>> We were also talking about the voting
rights in in the context of of Justice
Roberts and and Alito and and you said
that you believe Justice Roberts
despises the Voting Rights Act. And that
you know, that may or may not be the
case. I don't know what's what's in his
heart. But but his opposition
to it it has to do with jurisprudence,
right? It not race. But my my question
to you is whether or not jurisprudence
can be in in the context of the Voting
Rights Act can be disentangled from
race. Or is opposition to the Voting
Rights Act de facto racist?
I think that what the Supreme Court did
the other day
was deeply
intellectually
dishonest.
Um you you cannot disaggregate
uh the ghosts of Jim Crow and the
reality of race in our country
uh from the struggle around voting
rights.
Uh
I wasn't making a comment about what's
in
uh the Chief Justice's heart. Uh
but the legacy of the Roberts Court
is that through the Shelby case,
uh through the Calay case,
and through the Citizens United case,
uh they've done a lot of damage
uh to our democracy and our electoral
system.
>> But But I I I guess another way of
asking the question I was trying to get
at is, you know, what you describe as
intellectual honesty?
Is that tantamount to racism?
>> What I'm concerned about, let me put it
this way. What I'm concerned about is
impact.
Which is the very thing the court
decided that they won't even consider.
Uh they won't deal with the impact of
the decisions that they're making,
and we're seeing in real time the
consequences of that as literally you've
got southern states
that are in the middle of an election
deciding to pause the election, throw
out votes that have already been cast,
so that they can draw lines to get a
partisan advantage, and then claim, you
know, that it's not about race. Well, in
many cases it's not. It's about power.
But people who are greedy about for
power, people who want to hold on to
power,
they will use anything to hold on to
power, including race.
>> I'd like to ask you about something that
Justice Clarence Thomas said in a speech
at the University of Texas not that long
ago.
He said, "Progressivism seeks to replace
the basic premises of the Declaration of
Independence and hence our form of
government. It holds that our rights and
our dignities come not from God, but
from government."
>> [snorts]
>> So he he's basically suggesting
progressivism is anti-God, immoral, and
anti-American.
So you're a progressive politician and a
pastor who just wrote a book about
American morality. What do you think
Justice Thomas doesn't understand about
progressivism?
>> Well, it's it's uh it's rich to hear
from someone who's spent their career
working in in government
that that somehow government doesn't
have a role
to play in making sure people have their
voice. I don't know I don't know what to
make of of what Justice Thomas is
saying. Uh
I I know that he
uh seems seriously compromised to me
um by you know the the
the gifts that he's received over the
years.
And it it is it's just interesting to me
that Republicans are so obsessed right
now
with playing with the lines.
Uh Justice Thomas, along with his
colleagues, are complicit in this. And I
do wonder what they're thinking as
they're watching this. Um but you know,
I guess if they are as partisan as they
appear to be, maybe they're happy with
this.
>> And just the last question for you. Um
you know, I think
sort of the one of the animating ideas
of your book is that in
a lot of ways America has has you know,
its moral compass has gone awry or it's
it's lost its its its way morally.
What
what sort of
practical specific signs are you looking
for or should any of us be looking for
that would make us think
uh America has found its way morally?
>> What would that look like?
>> Yeah.
>> Isaiah says that the glory of the Lord
shall be revealed.
And all flesh shall see it together. I
don't mean to preach here, but I have to
tell you that as a preacher I used to
think that that text meant that the
glory of the Lord is so amazing and so
overwhelming that that all flesh will
see it and you can't help but see it
because it's God's glory after all.
I actually read it in the reverse now,
particularly in this moment. I think I
think that the insight, again, whether
you're a person of faith or not,
I the insight that that the prophet is
is laying out for us
is that there's some things we can only
see
when we get together.
>> Senator, thank you again for speaking
with me. I appreciate it.
>> Great to be with you.
>> [music]
>> I'm Lulu Garcia-Navarro.
>> And I'm David Marchese.
>> And we're the hosts of The Interview, an
audio
>> [music]
>> and video podcast from The New York
Times.
>> Every week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life. [music]
>> Subscribe to our YouTube channel so
you'll never miss an episode.